Hello,
thank you very much for inviting me to
speak on this topic about how radiation
actually affects your genetic code,
your nuclear and mitochondrial DNA.
Most people talk about lead,
they talk about barriers,
they talk about the inverse square law,
but there's very little data on the
actual permanent damage or mechanism of
action of radiation on our DNA.
So that's what I've studied for the last
14 years and I have conflicts to get this
work done.
We started a company through our hospital
tech transfer office and I'm the founder
and inventor of that company.
I will monitor myself to make sure I
don't have a conflict of interest.
We do have FDA and Health Canada approval
for this thing that I invented.
Our learning objective is to discuss what
happens to proteins and DNA at the
molecular level when exposed to radiation,
discuss the mechanism of action and
discuss strategies for protecting your
DNA from long term effects.
And I would add making it more aware that
we're not all equally vulnerable to
radiation, right.
I mean,
some of us with with particular genetic
inherited traits have greater risk of
injury than others from radiation.
OK,
so I'm specifically going to talk about
using antioxidants to prevent DNA damage
from X-ray radiation.
And there's a bunch of papers by us and
by other people showing that this simple
innocuous vitamin strategy has been shown
to markedly decrease DNA damage from
radiation.
We all know the volumes are enormous,
about 80 million CTS a year,
5 billion dental X-rays a year globally
from dentists,
the largest contributor of radiation to
children by far.
Most radiation is lactive, some acute,
but 7030.
The younger you are when you get the
radiation,
the longer the kind of incubation period
and the longer and the the opportunity to
grow a tumor.
And then of course we see this in say
kids in pediatric hospitals having renal
flow studies with nuclear medicine agents
or scoliosis,
children having repeated whole spine
studies getting sarcomas or kids with
hydrocephalus getting, you know,
10s of head CT's.
And they have secondary oncology side
effects.
If you have ACT on its own,
you get DNA breaks.
And we measure this by looking at gamma
H2 XA marker of DNA damage in peripheral
mononuclear cells in your blood.
And we draw the blood and we measure
those gamma H2X breaks.
If you have X-ray dye and CT,
you have even more breaks.
It's concatenation of effects.
Contrast enhanced CT increases the number
of double stranded DNA breaks over CT
alone.
Now if you have a radio iodine injection
for thyroid cancer,
then there's considerably increased DNA
damage.
Of course,
if you have chemotherapy and X-ray or
chemotherapy and X-ray and CT, you,
you have even more breaks,
increased susceptibility.
And now we do procedures with doses over
five grade to a patient with
electrophysiology,
with long coronary interventions,
with TAVI, with EVAR,
with AVM embolizations in the brains or
AV fistulas.
And it's not uncommon for patients to get
up to even 7 grey or a rarely 10 grey of
radiation from one procedure or a staged
set of procedures over time.
And those are therapeutic doses.
We know from cardiology literature
published by the CMAJ that every 10 milli
sieverts of low dose ionizing radiation
has a 3% increase in the risk of age and
sex adjusted cancer.
Every 10 milli sieverts has a 3% increase
in risk.
I looked at other things and found that
MRI is associated with DNA damage from a
different mechanism.
But there are three or four papers
showing that MRI is not innocuous,
and this just indicates that humans are
vulnerable to radiation.
Low dose radiation that we're exposed to
occupationally is generally overlooked by
comparison to patient exposure.
And our chronic low dose radiation
exposure occupationally is kind of Pooh
poohed by many people.
But it does cause a chronic inflammatory
state.
The IAEA pays very little attention to it.
Not all of us wear our badges,
but in our lifetime,
some of us will get doses of around 1
grain.
We know that the founders of radiology
did badly.
They lost fingers, they developed cancers,
they died.
And we know that some of our colleagues
are similarly today experiencing the side
effects of radiation exposure from their
occupations.
And then the work,
hence the work that Bob Foster etcetera
is doing,
there is a great picture of
interventionalists looking at their legs
and seeing that they have no hair on the
outside of the left side of the leg
because the X-ray tube is there.
We put DLDS on people's heads and arms
and necks etcetera and found that the
left side of the head got 6 times more
radiation than the right side of the head
in the Anjou sleep.
I wrote a very boring paper on
cataractogenesis,
looking in radiation exposure over time,
looking at the place in the lens that the
cataract develops,
it's the posterior chamber,
not the anterior middle that it's
age-related,
but the posterior aspect of the cataract
of,
of the of the lens is where the cataract
develops when it's radiation.
And there is a genetic susceptibility to
this.
And this is I think the Canary in the
coal mine for a greater concern of of
body radiation.
And we know that 38% of interventional
cardiologists get posterior lens
opacities and carrots.
We also know that in 2011,
the dose to the eye that was allowable
was reduced to 1/7 of the previous
allowable dose.
There are papers of 80 of 31 cases of
interventional cardiologists with left
sided brain tumors and you'll have heard
this from other people.
I was concerned about the fact that we
don't get screened prior to choosing our
career for risks of impaired repair from
radiation injury and I published this
paper.
It was very difficult to publish.
I got a lot of pushback on this.
But then my friend Bija Modari in London
looked at DNA damage and his colleagues
doing EVAR and found there was
significant individual variation and DNA
damage amongst individuals who got the
same dose,
proving in fact that not all of us are
equally able to repair damage.
There's a lot of data from DNIH looking
at radiation damage in X-ray
technologists who have delivered a
nuclear medicine materials showing
increased risk of squamous cell cancer,
all 'cause mortality, breast cancer, MI,
etcetera,
all from this reactive oxygen species.
And in fact there's work on cancer risk
and radiation technologists overall from
many different sites trying up to 5.
7 fold increase of thyroid cancer.
There's a whole stream of papers looking
at specific mutations and polymorphisms
and Snips etcetera,
copy number variations in medical workers
exposed to radiation and cardiologists
and meta analysis of these data in,
in radiation workers in nuclear medicine
facilities,
in nuclear power facilities showing that
specific types of aberrations of DNA are
associated with greater numbers of poor
outcomes and cancers, et cetera.
And we don't look at this right.
We, we don't think about this at all.
We all think we're equal.
Somehow we've become inure to the fact
that we're, we're, we're different now.
We rely on lead to protect us.
And one of the most fun,
cheapest projects I've ever done.
Well,
I spent 340 bucks buying lead testing
kits on Amazon.
And my students and I checked the lead
aprons that we use in our radiology
departments in three centers in our
system,
and we found that 61% of the hospital
lead aprons at the University Health
Network have free lead powder on their
surface.
There is no safe level of lead.
And other folks have measured lead levels
in the hair of X-ray technologists and
found that they are elevated.
In other words,
it's been ingested from fingertips and
food and eating.
So we're trying to protect ourselves with
lead,
but we're also getting lead into our
system.
So we need to find another method of
providing protection.
So what happened was I came home from
work bothered by all this and my
wonderful mother-in-law had just been
diagnosed with breast cancer and she was
told, you know,
we're going to give you radiation chemo
before the radiation.
Do not take these things.
And she showed me the list for advice and
they were all antioxidants.
And I thought heck,
if antioxidants can block the effect of
grey of radiation from therapeutic doses,
surely it will block milli sieverts of
radiation from from low dose radiation
occupationally or from a CT or a
mammogram.
And that initiated this research.
And basically the mechanism of action is
that radiation will hit a water molecule,
the water molecule will split,
producing free radicals,
and those free radicals will bind to
strands of DNA and this will result in an
oxidative injury because oxygen binds to
those free radicals at that site in the
DNA.
So if you give an antioxidant,
you decrease the presence of these free
radicals.
And that's the mechanism of action of
this.
How do you measure that?
Well,
there are two principal methods in
nuclear DNA.
You look at gamma H2X and P53-P53 is
called the guardian of the genome.
The guardian of the genome.
So I had this in my head.
My son, who was little at the time,
and our dog Cora went for a walk,
bumped into another dog.
I was thinking about antioxidants.
The owner of the other dog that we met
turned out to make antioxidants.
He asked me what I was bothered by.
I told him so I make antioxidants.
So we used his antioxidants in ourselves
and did experiments on ourselves to try
and make a cocktail that would decrease
DNA damage from radiation.
So we drew our blood,
radiated it in a cellar radiator and then
measured breaks with H2X and P53.
And then we took the formulation that we
had and saw that the number of breaks
decreased with premedication and we
mucked around with that.
And then we did a clinical trial with
this formulation of beta carotene, NAC,
vitamin question, alpha lipoic acid,
funded by our cardiology department,
the Peterman Cardiac Center,
who gave us A $40,
000 grant to do this work.
They published this paper in 2017 and
basically were able to show that in 10
patients, 5 premedicated, 5 not.
If they were not premedicated after a
bone scan, their breaks at least doubled.
And if they were premedicated,
there was statistically no change in the
number of breaks that they had.
So brilliant outcome.
And that started this work.
That work has been reproduced by other
people, published in Radiology.
I made a better formulation trying to
protect the nucleus with the help of a
mitochondrial expert neurologist who
treats inherited mitochondrial disorders,
Mark Turnipolski McMaster,
a professor of neurology.
There.
We added some key other elements,
and then we tried to expand the duration
of this in our system to 12 minutes to 12
hours, so 2 pills a day.
I did a bunch of experiments on myself
again looking at different doses and
different regimes.
Blue is radiation of my blood without pre
medication and orange is is is is
damaging my blood with pre medication.
And this went on for a while to we
perfected the doses.
We got a grant from MITACS and from NSERC
and from CIH or the equivalent of our NIH
up here in Canada.
And we looked at the ability of different
oncogenes to be impaired by these
antioxidants.
We looked at different mechanisms of
action.
I very little time.
So I won't go through all of that in
detail.
But at a very cellular level,
we're able to demonstrate that N&
K acetate and nasty oncogene is inhibited
by antioxidants from causing damage in
human bronchial alveoli cells.
And then we added methotrexate and we're
also able to show protection.
We looked at the dietary role of
antioxidants in P53 mediated cancer and
tumor suppression and we found that
there's there's a lot of evidence in the
literature showing that dietary
antioxidants have a cellular protection
effect.
We then used a cell radiator,
again with CIHR and Circuit Mitex funding
to look at human bronchial alveolar cells.
We did several studies.
We looked at double stranded DNA breaks
and we're able to show cellular
protection using that technique in the in
the cellar radiator.
We looked at single stranded DNA damage
in comet assay.
Again,
being able to show protection and having
done this work,
we then went out to study mice at
McMaster and mitochondria are are are
what were the key focus of that study in
mice.
Mitochondria are 13 times more sensitive
to radiation than nuclear DNA,
purely maternal inheritance.
So biologically female interventional
cardiologists doing procedures could
transmit mutations across generations.
OK, wrap your head around that.
Mitochondria have their own unique DNA
called mtDNA,
much more susceptible to radiation and
has a kind of a concatenation effect
where it, it perpetuates and increases.
And so we we wanted to target
mitochondria with this formulation.
We studied mice in three groups,
control group, no radiation,
radiation to the mice and then feeding
them our formulation.
And we were able to demonstrate in mice,
heart, liver,
brain that we could protect them at the
level of the control group by giving them
the antioxidants and protect them from
DNA damage in the DNA, mitochondrial DNA.
Mitochondrial DNA is really hard to study.
Very, very few people can do this.
And Mark's lab is one of three or four in
the world that can do this.
We then did a three arm single blinded
study at University Health Network,
again funded by the Piedmont Cardiac
Center here,
a brilliant foundation that we, we,
we have at the hospital.
They fund all sorts of of things.
And the blood was results were
interpreted by Mark's lab in a completely
blinded way because they had no idea what
we were doing because they're in a
separate hospital like 70 miles away.
And here there was a study of folks
performing EVAR and you know, EVAR,
aortic stenting, fenestrated, EVAR,
very big doses to the team,
to the patient, etcetera.
And in that setting,
looking specifically at mitochondrial,
we're able to show that there was a 54%
decrease in mitochondrial DNA damage with
premedication in the teams performing
these procedures,
20 people and that there was a 72%
decrease in nuclear DNA damage.
So 54% decrease in mitochondrial damage,
74% decrease in nuclear DNA damage when
premedicated one hour prior to the EVAR
with an oral pill, Well, 2 pills.
And we looked at individuals and we were
able to study their peripheral
mononuclear cells and we did gamma, H2 OX,
etcetera.
And we found that some individuals had
much different responses to equal amounts
of radiation than others,
again showing individual variation in
responsiveness.
Older interventionalists have greater
activation of their H2 OX repair system
than younger interventionalists.
This is important because it shows up
regulation of repair from chronic injury
over time and that hasn't been shown
before screening of trainees and staff I
think is emotionally complex.
But saying to people before they choose a
life of intervention,
before they choose 30-40 years of
radiation, hey, you know,
do you want to talk to a geneticist?
Do you want to see, I mean, do you,
does your mum have a history of breast
cancer?
Do your aunts have breast cancer?
Any history of BRCA one and two AP 53
mutation?
Because if that's the case,
maybe you get screened and,
and if you have it, then you decide, hey,
I'm going to be screened for breast
cancer myself or prostate cancer.
But also maybe I shouldn't be an
interventional cardiologist.
But that's an ethically complex
conversation that has to occur in the
right emotional context,
a well informed conversation.
We have some data now to initiate those
kind of thoughts.
We haven't had that kind of sophisticated
conversation about radiation risk before
in our world, but we need to.
These are mutations that are known in
interventional cardiologists to have been
associated with the development of
cancers from their occupational exposure.
OK.
I mean,
this is something well established in the
oncology literature,
and about 50% of them are P53 mutations.
But there's a ton of literature on this.
Why don't we discuss that more?
We should just,
this is a conversation worth having.
This is not just about barriers in that,
OK, we talk about personalized medicine.
Should we make personalized career
choices based on our DNA repair ability?
That's worth considering.
It begins with family and personal
history.
If genetic screening occurs,
1 might look for mutations and snips.
Snips are more common than mutations and
some thoughts BRCA one and two in
particular.
We need to look for this.
It's very common in the Ashkenazi Jewish
population and people from Iceland,
Scandinavia,
German span over the Spain and France.
Both male and female carriers of this P53
guardian of the genome ensures genetic
stability is key to repair response.
This is a critical thing to look for if
we're going to look for somebody's secure
occupation in the future.
ATM mutations, ataxiatellinjectasia,
you know, present in breast cancer,
lymphoid tumors decreases repairability.
Mitochondrial DNA very difficult to study.
Purely maternal transmission.
Fascinating, isn't it?
All our mitochondria are from our mother.
Can occupational radiation result in
mutations that cross generations?
We need to discuss that.
Now there's the larger picture of nuclear
accidents, first responders, dirty bombs.
How do we protect them?
This, this formulation could help them.
There's an issue of stockpiling.
You know,
the world is in a delicate balance right
now with bad actors who are armed with
nuclear weapons, who are untrustworthy.
And we need to think about the fact that
iodine is not enough.
Two years ago, I shipped 20,
000 pills to the Ukrainian army around
the Zafrazia power plant with the help of
a fabulous group of young men called
August Mission and the help of the
ambassador to the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.
So that's translation.
We talk about translation of our science.
That's benched trench, right?
And we got these amazing pictures back of
Ukrainian troops holding bottles of our
pills in bunkers around that nuclear site.
I want to thank you for letting me speak.
I want to thank the Peter Moncardiac
Center for,
for supporting this work and for our
equivalent of the NIH, the CIH or N Sirk,
the folks at Dalhousie at McMaster,
my colleague Peter Carlin,
who's completely mad,
Dave Nicholas and Joe Barfitt,
who I started this with 15 years ago.
And I'm, I'm,
I'm very grateful to you for the
opportunity.
I hope it makes you think think
differently about radiation.
Thank you.
Hello, my name is Doctor Lauren Ramsey.
I am a breast cancer surgeon in Fort
Worth,
TX and today I'm going to be speaking on
breast cancer and the link to radiation
exposure for my disclosures.
I am a consultant for Burlington Medical,
so I wanted to start out by talking about
the landscape of breast cancer in the
21st century.
Why are we worried about breast cancer?
And you know,
what does it mean to us on a daily basis?
Well, breast cancer is a big problem.
It's the world's most prevalent cancer.
It's something that we all have
encountered.
I feel like everyone knows a family
member,
a friend who's been affected by this
disease.
In 2022, there were 2.
3 million women diagnosed with breast
cancer,
and among new diagnosis of cancers,
breast cancer is the most common.
These are facts from the World Health
Organization.
So when it comes to risk factors for
breast cancer,
we know that there are lifestyle and
environmental risk factors.
You can see in the bottom graphic that
these are just some of the most common
risk factors.
But age.
So as women get older, gender,
the female gender, things like alcohol,
your genetics, some,
some people have a genetic predisposition
to have breast cancer with a certain gene
mutation.
Obesity is a risk factor for breast
cancer.
And you can also see that radiation is a
risk factor for breast cancer.
So I'm going to get more into this next.
So when it comes to radiation exposure
and breast cancer,
we know that breast tissue is a sensitive
tissue to the carcinogenic actions of
radiation and we know that radiation
exposure is a modifiable risk factor for
breast cancer.
So when I say modifiable risk factor,
we typically break up risk factors into
two segments,
modifiable and non modifiable.
So your non modifiable things are things
like your genes or your age,
things that you were just born with,
like you're if you have the genetic
mutation of BRCA,
that would put you at a higher risk for
breast cancer.
So these are things that you just can't
modify simply that's because how you were
born.
But when it comes to modifiable risk
factors,
these are things that we can actually
adjust and can actually change.
So we can, if it's obesity, you know,
you can lose weight, alcohol consumption,
you can reduce your alcohol intake and
radiation exposure.
You can reduce your radiation exposure or
better protect yourself from radiation.
There have been several studies.
You can see my citations at the bottom of
the slide that talk about the higher
incidence of breast cancer and healthcare
providers who work with radiation.
So there's a higher incidence of breast
cancer and radiologic technicians, sorry,
radiologic technologist and there's also
a higher incidence of breast cancer and
orthopedic surgeon.
So the studies have shown about a 2.
9 fold increase.
Some of the studies show up even higher
than a three fold increase in prevalence
of breast cancer and orthopedic surgeons
when they're compared with women of a
similar demographic.
So the studies have mostly been done in
orthopedic surgeons,
but there are more studies now looking at
interventional radiologists,
interventional cardiologists,
neurosurgeons,
just any surgeon who is around repeated
radiation exposure.
One of the theories behind this is that
the upper outer quadrant of the breast
can be exposed to more high doses of
radiation because the standard lead vest
and apron does not adequately protect
this area.
So when you just look at general
population,
the most common site of breast cancer is
actually the upper outer quadrant of the
breast.
And this area,
as many of you know who work and radiate
with radiation,
that the vest usually leaves that area
very vulnerable to the radiation exposure.
So a study by Valone ET al.
Showed that the upper outer quadrant of
the breast actually does receive higher
doses of scatter radiation and especially
when the lead or the radiation protection
does not fit correctly,
there's a higher dose of scatter
radiation that reaches that area.
And this is because the radiation
actually projects upward from the source.
So you can see in my figure that you have
your radiation source below the patient.
It goes through the patient and projects
outwards and upwards.
And often time this scatter radiation is
hitting the upper outer quadrant of the
breast,
which is not being protected by your
standard vest,
the US Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
So in the United States,
this is what sets a dose limits on
occupational radiation exposure.
You know,
they look at a lot of different organs,
but they do not have a regulation number
for the breast.
There's no dose limits.
So breast is just grouped in with any
organ.
So this just makes me think that maybe
it's time that we really consider the
breast specifically as an organ and as
tissue,
and we maybe make regulations to protect
the breast.
The American Medical Association has
recently discovered this and they
released this statement and it talks
about the things that I've kind of
mentioned.
So at the top you can see where they talk
about the standard aprons often leave the
upper outer quadrant of the breast
exposed.
And this is a common sight of breast
cancer in recent studies have shown that
there's an increased risk of breast
cancer among female surgeons who are
exposed to ionizing radiation during
image guiding procedures.
Sorry, not just surgeons,
but also any healthcare provider who's
exposed to any radiation.
So their resolution is that they are
encouraging institutions to ensure more
comprehensive coverage of this area of
the body by by providing protection that
more completely protects the whole breast,
including the upper outer quadrant.
So next I wanted to talk about our
research.
This is a paper that we published in the
Health Physics Journal and we talk about
protecting our own.
So protecting healthcare providers and a
method to reduce breast radiation
exposure and healthcare workers.
The purpose of our study was to test a
novel shield.
This is called the BAT shield because it
specifically protects the breast,
axilla and thyroid.
So BAT and we wanted to make sure that it
protected the breast,
but it also was mobile and comfortable
for the operator to wear and that it was
universally compatible with standard lead
aprons or vest.
So it didn't require any specific
attachments or modifications.
What we did is we simulated a procedure
room with a phantom and AC arm and we
placed dosimeters to the operator
quadrant of the breast, to the thyroid,
to the chest and to the deep spinal
tissues.
And we just tested different operator
positions and we compared the standard
lead vest just the with a thyroid shield
compared to a standard lead vest plus the
BAT.
So this is a, a picture,
a diagram of our methods.
This is kind of how we have the operator
either facing the patient or 90 to the
patient and the different positions.
Here are results that whenever the
phantom was wearing the standard apron
plus the BAT,
there was a significant reduction in
radiation for all anatomic areas.
So you can see in the graph,
the teal cover is just a standard vest
with a thyroid shield,
but the blue is a standard vest plus the
BAT shield.
So you can see that the chest,
the deep tissue,
the far breast and the near breast and
the thyroid all had a reduction in
radiation when wearing the BAT.
Most prominently you can see the near
breast.
So this is the breast that is nearest the
radiation exposure.
And you can see the dramatic reduction of
radiation exposure when wearing this
protective shield.
So for different operator positions,
the breast nearest the radiation exposure,
it had reductions ranging from 71.
4% to 97.7%.
So in conclusion,
the standard lead vest often leaves gaps
for radiation exposure,
especially to the upper outer quadrant of
the breast.
And as I said,
this is the most common site of breast
cancer.
We know that breast cancer is
radiosensitive and radiation exposure has
been linked to breast cancer.
The year multiple studies showing the
higher rates of breast cancer and
healthcare providers who work with
radiation.
So some solutions to decrease radiation
exposure to the breast are to reduce our
duration of exposure,
to increase the distance from the
radiation source,
and to make sure that all workers are
shielded with effective protective
garments.
So you have your standard gown which
covers your torso,
your reproductive organs,
your femur and your thyroid.
But it's time that we look at things like
axillary coverage or sleeves or or
garments like the BAT that had been found
to decrease radiation to the operator
quadrant of the breast.
I just think this is a very important for
all healthcare providers to be aware,
not only women but also men.
Men do have a risk of breast cancer.
And not only in our studies did we show
the reduction to the breast,
but also to the chest and the deep spinal
tissues.
So this is like your bone marrow and can
contribute to things like leukemias and
lymphomas.
So having that extra protection I think
is very essential for all healthcare
providers.
Hello,
I'm doctor Tom Egan from cardiovascular
Associates affiliated with the Baptist
Health System in Birmingham, AL.
My topic this morning is more than skin,
deep vascular eye and inflammatory
effects of ionizing radiation in the Cath
lab for cardiac catheterization
procedures.
I have nothing to disclose in relation to
this activity.
I have no conflicts of interest.
The objective this morning is
understanding ionizing radiation is
stochastic,
deterministic or tissue damage effects on
the skin, circulatory system and the eye,
and also as it relates to inflammation.
Ionizing radiation is more than just skin
deep.
Emerging evidence from a number of
studies have shown the effects of
ionizing radiation to those that are
exposed to radiation.
Among interventional cardiologists,
those are some of the most exposed
invasive occupations in all of medicine.
Many interventional cardiologists
undertake and perform very high volume
procedures as it relates to radiation.
For SCOPIC procedures,
those that have direct exposure and
exposure through scatter radiation,
there are known occupational risk now and
well published studies, both orthopedic,
stochastic or carcinogenic effects as it
relates to skin cancer,
brain cancer and then other effects as it
relates to the cataracts in the eye and
vascular issues.
We certainly have known for over 100
years that ionizing radiation in all
forms is carcinogenic and can be
affecting many of the organ systems in
the human body.
Most well known are those in the
hemopolytic system, the endocrine system,
and the gastrointestinal system.
But other systems within the human body
are also at risk for changes both direct
and indirect, leading to disease states.
We certainly know that there are
knowledge gaps that remain and the risk
are still poorly understand,
but because of recent epidemiological
studies,
there is more evidence to show how
stochastic effects can affect the human
body negatively to those that are exposed
to ionizing radiation.
More recently,
there have been better protection,
better protective devices, dosimeters,
protective equipment, etcetera,
and changes in the regulatory
recommendations for occupations that are
exposed to ionizing radiation.
If you look on the diagram on the left,
I published this article in the Journal
of Interventional Cardiology in 2011
regarding an interventional cardiologist
that had a number of skin cancers that
developed on exposed area of his skin.
You can see from the diagram the standard
lead apron that was worn and most of the
skin cancers at that time had developed
on the left side of this
interventionalist body.
A follow up study on this individual in
2017 published and CCI into 2017 show
that this individual cardiologist who
continued to do procedures developed over
100 non Melanoma based skin cancers on
the left side of his body.
We have research and cohorts,
specifically the lifetime study of atomic
bomb survivors from Japan,
over 60 years of data in that study with
over 100,
000 individuals showing the risk of
ionizing radiation to those that were
exposed to those two atomic bombs in
Japan.
We also have studies and other cohorts of
radiation accidents such as the Chernobyl
accident and radiation workers in Russia,
as well as France and the US that have
given new insights into the exposure of
these individuals to radiation and its
effects.
We've always known since the beginning of
radiation, and this was published in 1902,
that there are direct effects,
what we call deterministic effects,
actual cell death,
to tissues exposed to ionizing radiation
and specifically tissues of the skin.
The skin cells themselves undergo a lot
of turnover mitotic changes,
specifically hair follicles,
and therefore during the antigen phase
they are at risk for DNA damage and
subsequent carcinogenic effect as well as
immediate deterministic effects of
ionizing radiation.
All of those of us interventional
cardiologist that work in the Cath lab
have seen the damage done to certain
patients that received more than one to
two grades of radiation during a
prolonged interventional procedure and
then presenting a month later with a
round patch over their back or their
chest where they were exposed to intense
ionizing radiation.
The stochastic effects or carcinogenic
effects of ionizing radiation are less
understood and one of the questions
that's always asked well,
how much radiation is that?
How much radiation can one individual
person tolerate before they have
significant damage such as a carcinogenic
or stochastic effect?
And that remains relatively unclear.
However,
studies have now shown that there this is
a linear no threshold effect and there
are a number of factors that go into
whether someone suffers A stochastic
effect.
It can be age,
younger people are more sensitive to
radiation.
It can be sex.
Males are more affected.
There seems to be a protective effect of
estrogen.
There can be genetic factors,
and there can also be race factors,
Caucasian specifically,
or more sensitive to ionizing radiation.
So the stochastic effects have a linear
NO threshold.
That means there's an effect at a very
low dose of ionizing radiation,
and as the dose increases,
the effect is greater and greater,
and the risk therefore is greater in a
linear fashion.
So now we understand that there is other
issues besides just a deterministic
effect or a stochastic effect to those
exposed to ionizing radiation.
It is more complicated than simply
deterministic or stochastic.
There is new information,
as I said earlier,
merging evidence that shows there is
effects on the vasculature,
their effects on the brain,
their effects as well on the skin.
This is modified or changes occur not
only from direct effects and release of
free radicals, reactive oxygen species,
but also what's called the bystander
effect,
where when 1 area of the body is exposed
to ionizing radiation,
it can affect another area that was not
exposed.
Well.
How does that work?
Well,
if you have a cell such as a skin cell,
follicular hair follicle cell.
This exposed to ionizing radiation of
whatever form, gamma, beta, alpha,
you name it.
That cell which is a cell undergoing
mitosis and dividing during the antigen
phase is very sensitive to ionizing
radiation and DNA damage can occur which
mutates the cell and it leads to this
carcinogenic effect.
So timing is of the essence here and
that's why it's important as it relates
to the skin because of the rapid turnover
of hair follicle cells and is also
important for the eye because of the
epithelial cells in the limbs.
So timing is also a factor as when
someone would get a negative effect from
ionizing radiation.
There's also vascular effects.
And I said earlier that there's emerging
evidence.
We know that the endothelium of vascular
vessels is very radiation sensitive and
vulnerable to ionizing radiation because
it's rapid turnover as well.
Oxygen,
reactive oxygen species or otherwise
known as free radicals are released by
ionizing radiation.
This effects mood, muscle contractility,
the permeability, the function of cells,
vascular tone, blunted basal dilatation,
endothelial dysfunction,
which as we all know leads to
atherosclerosis,
and other risk factors that cause
cardiovascular disease.
Ionizing radiation,
the vascular vasculature,
causes increase of reactive oxygen
species or free radicals.
These free radicals have all of these
negative effects,
all of which we all know has been well
worked out and determined from a
biochemical aspect,
leads to unopposed vasoconstriction,
leads to inflammation,
all of which leads to increased arterial
wall hypertenicity and atherosclerosis.
What is well known is the effects on the
eye.
The lens,
which is made-up of lens epithelial cells,
is very radiation sensitive and there are
a number of studies beginning in the late
1800s that have shown that gamma
radiation can cause cataracts,
specifically posterior lens cataracts.
In most individuals that develop
cataracts as it relates to age and UV
radiation,
those are usually anterior cataracts.
But when individuals are exposed to
ionizing radiation,
the posterior portion of the lens is more
sensitive and it has to do with the
turnover.
And we've seen this in number of studies
with interventional cardiologists at the
risk of posterior lens cataracts is
almost 33 1/2% and the overall risk is 6.
8, which is relatively high.
So certainly eye protection is well
needed and those individuals that are
exposed to ionizing radiation, the lens,
like I said earlier,
the lens epithelial cells when exposed to
ionizing radiation cause a number of
things occur, incomplete differentiation,
activation,
cell death and then carcinogenic.
And this can be both with a threshold but
also without a threshold,
meaning that it's not just a threshold
effect.
It can occur at any dose of ionizing
radiation.
In addition to the effects on the skin
and the eye and the circulatory system,
ionizing radiation induces an
inflammatory response.
We have a number of studies that have
shown that even low dose radiation less
than .
5 grey exposure induces damage to T cell
immunity.
There's a dichotomy of responses as it
relates to the dose of ionizing radiation,
which is very interesting because at low
dosage you see a more of a pro
inflammatory immune profile with damages
to the T cell immunity.
But at moderate doses,
you see an anti-inflammatory effect where
you can treat patients that have
inflammation with moderate dosages and
reduce that inflammation.
However,
when you look at these studies as studies
of individuals and this is cohorts and
also the mirroring or mouse models,
you can see at the low dose how it
affects and inhibits the immune system
and direct effect on T cells.
At an intermediate dose that is between .
1 and 1,
Gray radiation has an anti-inflammatory
effect.
It can improve patients that have
inflammation.
But when you move to a high dose,
you have severe damage to the immune
system, immune suppression,
a pro inflammatory response and release a
very dangerous signals that induce
carcinogenesis, that induce inflammation.
And then from there the bystander effect
takes over and more damage is done
throughout the human body.
With that,
I'll stop there and take questions.
Hello, everyone, and,
and welcome back to to this great session
that we just had.
This is a question and answer session and
I do hope that you would send in your
questions and answers.
Hopefully we'll get those answers here to
this panel of experts and or we'll answer
them offline kind of in between.
But but I promise you we'll get those,
we'll get those answers.
Joined by Bella Housing,
the Co director of SERP this year.
And and really looking forward to this.
I learned, you know,
I think out of this session,
I probably will learn the most because I
have so, so much to learn in this field.
But but we're joined by Doctor Karen
Murphy,
professor of interventional
neuroradiology in Toronto.
We have Doctor Lauren Ramsey from she's a
medical director of breast surgery
welcome at Fort Worth.
And then Doctor Tom Egan here,
president of Cardiovascular Associates in
Birmingham,
AL And so got a great team here and I can
kind of start off.
I'd love to ask Doctor Murphy,
just a question about, about that testing.
I was fascinated when you talked about
our risk and everybody's risks are
different to exposure, this radiation and,
and all the things that you could
possibly test to see if you're more
susceptible to the next person.
I know at least in cardiology,
we have people afraid to get calcium
scores because they don't really want to
know if they have,
if they have coronary disease and they're
afraid that life insurance is then going
to be affected and everything else.
And so how do we have that conversation
and, and, and,
and before we kind of start that process
of seeing who is really truly susceptible
and who should maybe take another line of
work question, it's an ethical issue,
isn't it?
It has to be handled compassionately.
But I think first thing would be just
some insight into the fact that we're not
all equally backed by radiation.
And then look at family history,
the if your mom or aunts at BRCA,
one or two breast cancer that might make
you look for a, or you know,
if there was some other range lineage of
things, obviously the,
the MEN syndromes would stand out.
But then we could take some peripheral
blood other than the solar radiator,
expose it to a standard amount of
radiation and in a controlled way,
look for the amount of innate damage you
get in the nucleus or mitochondria by
doing common assay or 50 or gamma H2 IX
and, and get an estimate from that.
And it'll be arranged.
Probably it'll depend on nutrition,
it'll depend on antioxidant intake,
but something simple like that.
But I think it begins with a conversation
and then the right ethical principle,
genetic counseling context.
Great.
I had,
I did want to tell a little story that I
actually heard this week,
and I want to direct this at you,
Doctor Ramsey.
There was a friend of mine whose fiance
is an orthopedic resident,
and she just started her residency
program and,
and I won't name the facility,
but she started that and she said, yeah,
but they're not going to buy her a lead
apron until her third year of residency
in orthopedics.
And until then,
she just has to either find someone
else's or stand behind somebody in the OR.
So I think that's what we're dealing with.
You know,
the people I'm not sure really care about
about us.
And I think to this point, you know,
we've been kind of cavalier about not
caring for ourselves.
But but, you know,
it's time that we get the protection we
need if we're going to be put in those
situations where we're exposed to have
the right equipment and garments and
coverage that we need.
Thoughts on that?
Yeah, absolutely.
I mean,
that was my experience as a surgery
resident and I was in general surgery,
so I was never provided with my own apron
or grenade.
I use fluoroscopy a lot less than
orthopedic surgeon,
but that was my whole inspiration behind
creating the bat and thinking about how
women really need to be protected and
also men.
So unfortunately it has been hard to get
institutions and programs to care.
And if I could change one thing,
I wish that that would be it,
that we were provided with appropriate
protection.
But I think the culture is changing.
I saw a recent meta analysis about the
increased risk of cancer and healthcare
providers who work with radiation.
So I think as like those numbers are
starting to come out and we're starting
to get the word out there.
I've been trying to advocate for this on
social media with different physicians.
That's what it's going to take to,
you know,
like have hospitals actually change their
policies.
Good, Bella.
I don't want to, again,
I don't want to take all the questions if
you want to ask, if you want to ask them.
And I've got a few more too.
Yeah.
So my first is, is more of a comment.
It's just to say that obviously these
talks are super powerful.
And if there are younger generations
sitting watching this,
the the point is not to scare and it's
not the point for me personally anyway,
it's not to deviate you away from this
career is to actually say,
these are the problems and we're going to
throw out this virtual online courses to
also tell you the solutions.
So it's important to bear that in mind
and not to be frightened,
not to go and think, OK,
this is absolutely not the career for me.
Absolutely not.
The point is,
is that we have solutions now that we
didn't know about before and we didn't
even really fully understand or
appreciate the problems that we're facing
anyway.
So these are the two things and to marry
the two together.
So it's not to create panic and not to
create worry.
My question really for anybody from the
panel moving forward, I mean,
I am flabbergasted that anybody would
ever ask a trainee to go into a room
without like this is you don't want to
remember saying to Andy,
should we have rules?
Should we have laws?
This would be one of them.
That's just to scare.
But what do you think we we can do about
this?
I mean, just listening to talk,
my first thought is we have to rampart
the whole place out because that would be
the first solution, you know,
to just try and stop as much scatter from
getting anywhere until we discover fully
which areas are really more, you know,
problematic than others.
But for you guys and fam, what,
what would you,
what would be your take on this?
What would be the first line of action,
Something that I wish my institution had
was do seminars where we can actually see
the readings instead of having to submit
and for waiting a month until we get the
report just because I feel like by the
time we get the data, it's too late.
So I wish that that was something that
more institutions would adopt or you kind
of get a more more up to date reflection
of your actual exposure.
Yeah,
I think that would be perfect as well,
especially for female pregnant staff.
That'd be great.
Other guys,
could I just say that I discovered in our
facility that the Angel Suites doesn't go
all the way to the scene.
It's actually only gets about two feet in
the ceiling and stops.
So our room is not really landline,
it's just are you asleep spy intervention
and stunningly though,
it doesn't go all the way to the roof.
But when you're sitting in the control
room and you think no lad, we're safe,
it's all good.
The fact scatter coming into the room.
The thing is,
I had great fun with my ideology
residents doing this study.
I got really expensive high tech study,
bought instant lead tests on Amazon.
There are lead aprons to look for free
lead dust on the surface of the aprons
and 63% of them have free dust come
across free dust doesn't think those red.
So that's also bad.
And if you some other folks have the same
thing,
they'd be measuring lead level in the
hair of technologists.
There's that in the hair of the
technologies out of the ultrasound text,
that's the future text,
but the dust is getting on their finger
or whatever getting it.
It's not safe level of life.
People are little things that indicate
that we really have application has to be
like radiation workers, the nuclear power,
not like the people working with asbestos
responsible.
That's the whole show.
Yeah, I agree.
I think that, you know,
we've got a long way to go in these labs
to get them up to speed on on providing a
safe environment for us to be in,
whether it's maintaining our LED like it
should be, whether it's clean cleaning,
you know, cleaning our our LED,
whether it is providing the appropriate
barrier protection,
whether it's disposable or or large
barriers.
And it really depends on what you do and
who all's in the room and,
and trying to get everyone,
trying to get everyone protected.
So looking at at each of these and,
and I think now there are capabilities of
really driving those numbers lower.
But I think first we have to understand
it.
And like you said, Doctor Ramsey,
I think using some of these real time
disseminary to know what numbers,
what we can do even in the rooms,
because I'm surprised that people don't
know what the effective angles are of
your, of your sea arm and,
and how much that really changed.
And do you really need those steep angles
that often and, and raising the table and,
and, you know,
just small barriers in certain positions
that, you know,
have very high scatter area.
So I do think there's a lot of things
that we can do just through really just
through education to make,
to make big changes.
Doctor Eagan, you know, thank,
thanks for joining us.
And I know that, that, you know, I've,
I've obviously had my, my issues with my,
my back problems and,
and both of us were on the scatter denial
video.
And for all the participants who haven't,
haven't seen that scatter denial video
going through the history of radiation
and, and, and, and really how, how it,
it affects you and,
and the different people that it,
that it has affected.
You know, all of us have,
have friends that have, have even had,
you know,
brain cancers and things like that,
and certainly back injuries and other
injuries.
But,
but as you start seeing your colleagues,
when you,
when you've been in this business for 20
or 30 years,
starting to fall out and you see really
good, talented,
talented people that no longer can work
and no longer can teach,
it really is devastating.
So you know what I know, Tom,
you've been here in Birmingham, we,
we've experienced people that,
that have had those and,
and how do we get to this next generation?
So that, you know,
ideally it shouldn't be reactive like it
is.
It shouldn't be like,
like some of us who had to come out of
the lab because of our injuries.
You really need to get to that younger
generation before they,
before they get hurt.
So how do we reach them?
Well, Bob, first of all,
I agree with Bella.
I mean, I think we, you know,
fortunately for me and that example of my
talk that was me,
my case and my case is pretty well
documented by David Documentary and
better denials what happened to me and
the hundreds of spin cancers that I
developed on the left side of my body.
But I came out in cardiology and
interventional cardiology late 80s and
early 90s once protection was very poor
and the equipment was very poor and there
was a lot of high doses of radiation that
we use the wrong case.
It is very limited protection.
So that's unfortunate for us.
The older generation that came out when
this subspecialty was in its infancy and
all we cared about was the patient and
the outcomes and really didn't care about
ourselves,
our own health because it was so exciting
as we saw in that earlier video about
being the hero,
about being able to take care of these
really, really sick patients.
So I think and the other thing I would
say, Bob, is that, you know,
when we first started this special of
interventional cardiology got more mature,
we started to test,
we started to develop a subspecial of
interventional cardiology,
started to test, certify physicians.
And I remember one of the very first
lectures out of those pre board test
that's that when this was brought up,
there was very little knowledge and it
was good because some small studies,
basically phone call studies show that
there was no quote increased risk to
interventional cardiologist that got
exposed to radiation.
And we know that is the thought now that
is much bull and that's unfortunate that
came out.
I think now with events like this that
bring awareness to the risk to
technicians, to cardiologist, the nurses,
all those at work and get labs.
If there is a risk that we need better
protection for ourselves.
But we need to get industry to improve
the devices, the techniques,
the X-ray equipment.
And then this should be a part of the
training for new positions.
And it ought to be required to set
standards on how we protect all those
that are exposed to radiation.
And I think nowadays with some of the
things that you're doing and some of
these other companies that.
In an industry that's involved,
we will see a better future and less risk
to those individuals that are in the
field today.
Well, great.
Well, thank you everybody for,
for being in the session.
We will be back at 1:15 Eastern Time for
session three.
That's going to be a great session.
That's protecting your body,
preventing injury and fatigue.
So hope to see you all there and thank
you again for for joining us.
Thank you.